Okay.
NOTE CONF
Good afternoon.
So yesterday or logically speaking, last week we talked about
NOTE CONF
putting formulae into a nice normal form DNF or CNF.
We did that by Cono maps humanly, and we did
NOTE CONF
it by messing around with pushing formulae with De Morgan's.
Or at least I hope you did, because yesterday I
NOTE CONF
asked you to go away and do that.
Um, did anybody write a program to turn a formula
NOTE CONF
into DNF?
Nobody really.
NOTE CONF
I'm sure somebody did.
Um, so what I haven't done is tell you What
NOTE CONF
CNF and DNF are good for.
Why do we want to turn formally into this particular
NOTE CONF
nice, simple form?
And what we're going to do now is take a
NOTE CONF
break from turning formula into CNF or DNF and explore
what it is we can do with them once we've
NOTE CONF
got them into that form.
So what are they good for?
NOTE CONF
So the next topic of this week, meaning for today
and Thursday since we're running a little ahead, is finding
NOTE CONF
satisfying assignments.
So what's a satisfying assignment?
NOTE CONF
Well, the satisfying assignment is a way of making a
formula.
NOTE CONF
True formula mentions an assortment of variables propositions a, b,
c, d, p, q, r, whatever.
NOTE CONF
And given a formula, you might ask, can we make
the formula true?
NOTE CONF
So when we were doing proofs, we found a way
to work that out so we could take a formula.
NOTE CONF
We could try to prove it.
We might find that it was a tautology, in which
NOTE CONF
case it's always true.
We might find it was a contradiction, in which case
NOTE CONF
it was always false, or we might find that it
was neither, in which case doing a proof, a sequent
NOTE CONF
calculus proof gave us a set of assumptions which were
sufficient to make it true.
NOTE CONF
Sequent calculus proof is not a particularly fast way of
doing things, and in applications of logic, one wants quite
NOTE CONF
quickly to find out whether a formula can be satisfied
and if it can be satisfied, what the values of
NOTE CONF
the variables are.
So there are countless examples of things that can be
NOTE CONF
turned into.
Here's a formula.
NOTE CONF
Find settings of the variables to true or false that
satisfy it, but make it true.
NOTE CONF
One example is timetabling.
So timetabling your exams.
NOTE CONF
Obviously timetabling the exams for this course is nice and
easy, but timetabling all your exams is a very hard
NOTE CONF
problem, and it can be turned into a problem of
finding a satisfying assignment for a Boolean formula, a large
NOTE CONF
Boolean formula, but nonetheless a Boolean formula and many, many
other problems can be.
NOTE CONF
In fact, it can be proven that any problem can
be turned into, well, any reasonable problem can be turned
NOTE CONF
into finding a satisfying assignment.
There are problems that are so hard we can't even
NOTE CONF
do that.
But many practically important problems can be expressed as finding
NOTE CONF
settings of a variable that make a formula true.
So what I'm going to do today and Thursday is
NOTE CONF
introduce some formalism and introduce a little bit of programming
just to show you how we would program it.
NOTE CONF
And then I'm going to talk about a very, very
famous algorithm for finding the satisfying assignments of a formula.
NOTE CONF
Now, I'll tell you in a little bit about why
it's famous and why it deserves to be famous.
NOTE CONF
But I thought I might just say a little bit
about the people attached to it.
NOTE CONF
So it's called DPL.
That stands for Davis, Putnam, Laghman and Loveland.
NOTE CONF
And notice only one of them is still alive.
And Martin Davis sadly died last year.
NOTE CONF
And it's a very interesting set of authors, because these
two people were very well known to me before I
NOTE CONF
started teaching this course, and I'd never heard of these
two.
NOTE CONF
So despite the fact that this is a core piece
of computer science.
NOTE CONF
Who are these people?
Martin Davis is not, by any stretch of the amount,
NOTE CONF
was not by any stretch of the imagination, a computer
scientist.
NOTE CONF
He was a set theorist.
Um, unless you are doing maths and you already know
NOTE CONF
that you're going to do set theory, you probably know
very little about modern set theory.
NOTE CONF
Modern set theory is fantastically complicated.
Um, it's one of the most abstruse areas of pure
NOTE CONF
mathematics.
Um, just to give you an idea, I used to
NOTE CONF
do a bit of set theory because it has applications
in my computer science research.
NOTE CONF
A decade or two ago, I subscribed to the Journal
of Symbolic Logic, which is the main publication, and in
NOTE CONF
a typical journal there were about between 2 and 5%
of the journal was something I had some hope of
NOTE CONF
understanding without.
Well, actually no, no qualifications.
NOTE CONF
Something I had some hope of understanding.
Set theory is an old and very complicated subject, and
NOTE CONF
has nothing, apparently to do with finding satisfying assignments.
I still don't actually know the story of how Martin
NOTE CONF
Davis came to get involved in this.
Hilary Putnam, as you can see, he's another was another
NOTE CONF
older person.
He's also famous.
NOTE CONF
He's mainly famous as a more philosophical logician, but also
with some logical technical achievements of note.
NOTE CONF
But he was not a computer scientist by any means.
So we have a set theorist and a logician, and
NOTE CONF
these two people whom I hadn't heard of are in
fact computer scientists were and are computer scientists.
NOTE CONF
They just happened to work in areas of computer science
that I don't.
NOTE CONF
So you can go and look them up and find
out what they have done.
NOTE CONF
Loveland is still alive, but not working, which in America
is unusual because they tend to go on forever.
NOTE CONF
But what they came up with is an algorithm that
is remarkable for its simplicity, its and its effectiveness, which
NOTE CONF
is more or less the definition of beautiful mathematics.
So before we get on to talking about DHFL, let
NOTE CONF
me talk about CNCF a little more formally and think
about how we might represent this in Haskell.
NOTE CONF
So this is the kind of thing that you should
have been doing yesterday after the lecture, when I said,
NOTE CONF
go away and work out how to do it.
So we looked at corner maps, and you have also
NOTE CONF
looked at representing formal languages of various kinds in Haskell.
So you've represented Boolean propositions using the or and the
NOTE CONF
and with two colons as constructors.
And what I'm going to do now is illustrate how
NOTE CONF
we might represent Boolean propositions specifically in CNF, and use
them in Haskell to solve problems.
NOTE CONF
So let me refresh the terminology.
This is the terminology from last week.
NOTE CONF
And the technical terms as usual are in purple.
So we're going to need to have those embedded.
NOTE CONF
And the terms I haven't used last week except accidentally,
but these are fairly standard and one has to remember
NOTE CONF
what they are.
So remember CNF is a formula that is an and
NOTE CONF
of ORS.
So it's a big and an.
NOTE CONF
Each of the things that is being ended is an
or of simple formulae.
NOTE CONF
So that means a formula.
So a formula is formula CNF formula is a conjunction
NOTE CONF
of things.
Shall I write one?
NOTE CONF
So there's a CNF formula.
It's a conjunction of things.
NOTE CONF
The things that it's a conjunction of will be called
clauses.
NOTE CONF
Um, so this is a fairly standard logical use of
clause which is vaguely related to its grammatical use, but
NOTE CONF
not very.
And each clause here is a disjunction of things.
NOTE CONF
And what's it's a disjunction of either atomic propositions or
negated atomic propositions.
NOTE CONF
And those things we call literals.
Um, why are they called literals?
NOTE CONF
It's a historical piece of terminology.
It's because they literally say what they mean, I guess.
NOTE CONF
So the term literal means either an atomic proposition or
a negated atomic proposition.
NOTE CONF
And atomic means just the the things that are part
of our language, part of our universe, part of our
NOTE CONF
model.
Um, the terminology I'm going to use all the time.
NOTE CONF
So it's important that you absorb it.
Any questions about the terminology?
NOTE CONF
So the only thing to remember is that clauses go
inside formally.
NOTE CONF
Um, here's a piece of Haskell for you.
By now, this should be easy to read.
NOTE CONF
So let's go through it and check that all of
it is Haskell.
NOTE CONF
You know, I think it is all Haskell, you know?
So I'm defining.
NOTE CONF
A data type literal which takes an argument type atom.
So given a type of atoms, a literal of an
NOTE CONF
atom is either a positive atom or a negative atom.
So I'm using p and n for positive and negative
NOTE CONF
notice by the way that this is kind of adding
notation.
NOTE CONF
So I'm effectively.
Adding plus signs or something into the notation to say
NOTE CONF
this literal is positive rather than just using the atom
by itself.
NOTE CONF
The reason we do that is so the types work.
I want literals to be different from atoms.
NOTE CONF
So a literal has to be either the atom occurring
positively or the atom occurring negatively.
NOTE CONF
Is everybody okay with that as a piece of.
As a sensible piece of Haskell?
NOTE CONF
I see some slightly half hearted.
So anybody have a worry about it or question about
NOTE CONF
why I'm doing it?
So really, the only question is why do I have
NOTE CONF
positive atoms?
Why do I distinguish literals from atoms?
NOTE CONF
It's a general principle of Haskell programming.
Have as many types as you need.
NOTE CONF
So never feel shy of introducing another data type because
they let you separate things out and do pattern matching.
NOTE CONF
And if you ever find you have too many, you
can always convert between them.
NOTE CONF
So having defined a type of literal things I'm then
going to define a clause.
NOTE CONF
And this is a slightly confusing piece of Haskell.
But why not?
NOTE CONF
What is a clause of atoms?
A clause of atoms is defined like this, right?
NOTE CONF
Can you all now read that Haskell definition?
You'll notice that I haven't put the types in there,
NOTE CONF
so I'm expecting you to be able to work out
what the types are.
NOTE CONF
Um.
What is the type of this capital o r thing?
NOTE CONF
Nope.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
What's wrong with it?
So it takes a list of literals, because you can
NOTE CONF
see I'm applying it to a list of literals.
But what's it returning?
NOTE CONF
A clause, more specifically, a clause of atoms So this
is actually your standard Haskell algebraic data type definition.
NOTE CONF
Um, Don told me that algebraic data types are where
Haskell starts getting difficult for most people, which is unfortunate
NOTE CONF
because it's the core of what Haskell is.
Remember, when I write a data type like this and
NOTE CONF
I'm using this thing that helpfully colours things for you?
So this red or is a data constructor?
NOTE CONF
It's a thing that we use to build up a
data type.
NOTE CONF
The brackets are lists.
So what we have in here is a literal atom.
NOTE CONF
This is a list of literal atoms.
And then I apply the or data constructor to it
NOTE CONF
in order to produce something that is a clause of
atoms.
NOTE CONF
So a clause is essentially a list of atoms joined
by Also, but it's important to note that this thing
NOTE CONF
is simply a data constructor.
It has no meaning whatsoever.
NOTE CONF
So all I'm doing here is taking a list of
clauses, for example.
NOTE CONF
I can't draw it because I have to draw it
in Haskell.
NOTE CONF
I'm taking a list of clauses and I'm tagging it
with the Or data constructor.
NOTE CONF
And that gives me a thing that is a clause.
Um, why am I doing that?
NOTE CONF
I could also say that a clause.
I could do this.
NOTE CONF
So a clause is basically just a list of the
atoms in it.
NOTE CONF
Why have I made it a datatype by adding this
constructor?
NOTE CONF
I remember the fact that this says or has no
meaning.
NOTE CONF
It's not actually doing any kind of or it's just
the tag.
NOTE CONF
Why am I doing that?
Rather than simply defining the clause type to be just
NOTE CONF
a list of atoms, a list of literals.
Any clauses, a list of literals, and any list of
NOTE CONF
literals makes a clause.
So why don't I just define them to be the
NOTE CONF
same thing?
It's easy to understand.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
What a reason.
NOTE CONF
There are many reasons, but so one is understandability.
Yeah sorry.
NOTE CONF
Readability.
So that's it.
NOTE CONF
So if it's a different type that helps me read
it, I can see that it's supposed to be an
NOTE CONF
error.
So although this all has no actual meaning, obviously as
NOTE CONF
a human I can see that it's the English word
or and that reminds me what I'm doing, that a
NOTE CONF
clause is something that is an or of literals.
What's another reason?
NOTE CONF
A more practical reason.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
It makes it easier to.
Um, I don't have to put in AWS myself.
NOTE CONF
Well, I do, because the author has no meaning.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So if I want to evaluate it, for example, I'm
going to have to write a function that takes this
NOTE CONF
capital or thing strips off the capital o r and
applies little or to the list.
NOTE CONF
So it doesn't make it easier.
In fact, it makes it possibly harder.
NOTE CONF
To.
Differentiate between CNF and DNF.
NOTE CONF
So that's a a good reason.
I might have clauses for DNF and CNF.
NOTE CONF
I'm not doing that at the moment, but I could
um, which is kind of leading on yeah, pattern matching.
NOTE CONF
So I can now pattern match against the Or.
And I know that I'm dealing with the clause which
NOTE CONF
leads on to which is leading even closer to one
of the things that modern programming languages and Haskell in
NOTE CONF
particular, do.
A lot of that makes your life much easier.
NOTE CONF
What's the thing they do that makes your life much
easier?
NOTE CONF
Type checking.
If I say that a clause is a list, then
NOTE CONF
Haskell can't tell the difference between something.
I mean to be a clause and something.
NOTE CONF
I mean to be a list.
If I do this, then it's a different type.
NOTE CONF
And so Haskell will tell me if I'm randomly taking
a list of things that happen to be literals and
NOTE CONF
using them where I didn't intend to use them as
a clause, or vice versa.
NOTE CONF
You might think that's not very likely to happen, but
you'd be surprised what you can come up with because
NOTE CONF
you use lists everywhere in Haskell programming.
And this is what I meant when I said a
NOTE CONF
couple of minutes ago, introduce new types freely because they
give you type checking.
NOTE CONF
Sometimes you find that the type checking then gets in
the way, and you have to write functions to convert
NOTE CONF
between types.
But that's safer than saying, oh, I don't care about
NOTE CONF
type checking.
Um, so this is the official line, and I believe
NOTE CONF
it when I'm lecturing about Haskell.
As I may have mentioned before, the language I do
NOTE CONF
most of my ordinary everyday systems programming is Perl, which
is notable for having about three types, and it freely
NOTE CONF
converts between them whenever it thinks it's a good idea.
Which makes for some very hard debugging problems sometime, but
NOTE CONF
makes it a good intellectual exercise.
Okay, so that's a clause.
NOTE CONF
Having defined a clause, I'm going on to define the
type of form for formula.
NOTE CONF
I don't know why I was too lazy to write
formula just because I'm inherently lazy.
NOTE CONF
And what is a form?
A formula is just an and of a list of
NOTE CONF
clauses.
So I'm doing exactly the same thing.
NOTE CONF
And again here the and has absolutely no meaning.
It's just the data constructor, a tag attached to this
NOTE CONF
list of clauses to say that I mean it to
be a formula.
NOTE CONF
So.
So far I have talked about literals and clauses and
NOTE CONF
formulae.
So now we've got that far through.
NOTE CONF
Any questions about what I'm doing there?
Have you all mastered polymorphism?
NOTE CONF
No.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
What is this atom?
What is atom in this definition?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Um, well, quite likely I'm going to intend it to
be a string, but that's not what it is in
NOTE CONF
the piece of Haskell in front of you.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
A type placeholder, a type variable, I think we say.
So what I'm saying here is that I can take
NOTE CONF
any type.
Plug it in and get a type of literals.
NOTE CONF
So for example.
If I have a type string, then I can define
NOTE CONF
literal of string to be positive strings and negative strings.
So what I'm doing here is saying I want to
NOTE CONF
give myself the freedom to use whatever is convenient for
the atomic propositions.
NOTE CONF
Strings are an obvious example, but as you see down
here, that's not actually what I'm doing in this one.
NOTE CONF
I'm doing something much more primitive and arguably rather stupid.
But it's easy and it makes for short formulae.
NOTE CONF
So polymorphism, this ability to define types that depend on
other types is another critical thing about functional programming languages,
NOTE CONF
and it's now spread into almost all other modern languages
as well.
NOTE CONF
We call it polymorphism because the type literal can have
many shapes.
NOTE CONF
Polymorphism means many shapes, and it can have a shape
with a string, the shape with a number, the shape
NOTE CONF
with a boolean, the shape with or whatever you like
for atom.
NOTE CONF
And in this particular definition I'm going to define a
type A data type which is uppercase atom.
NOTE CONF
So this is an actual type.
And I'm just going to say oh I'm just going
NOTE CONF
to have abcd w x y z.
So this is a very simple finite predetermined set of
NOTE CONF
atomic propositions, which is enough for playing around with things
as was suggested.
NOTE CONF
Anybody with any sense would probably make atom B string
so that you can have whatever atomic propositions you like,
NOTE CONF
but for reasons I now can't remember, possibly because I
inherited the code.
NOTE CONF
This is how we're doing it here Um, notice there's
the usual bit of magic here.
NOTE CONF
Has this been explained to you officially yet?
I explained it early on, unofficially, sort of.
NOTE CONF
Maybe a bit.
Um, so to remind you what it means, it says
NOTE CONF
tells Haskell to do the obvious thing with this.
It tells it that A is equal to A, and
NOTE CONF
that if it's going to, if it's asked to print
the value of A, it should print a.
NOTE CONF
Um, it's not really to do with programming.
It's a bit of magic.
NOTE CONF
And in practice I'm also going to put deriving it
show into everything else as well, because it makes life
NOTE CONF
a lot easier.
So that's a page of Haskell data type.
NOTE CONF
We'll start using it in a moment.
But before I go and start using it, any final
NOTE CONF
questions about the data type definition?
I think this illustrates everything you're supposed to know so
NOTE CONF
far in Haskell data type definitions.
Um, well, what can we do with it?
NOTE CONF
Here are some little pieces of code which do simple
jobs that we're going to need.
NOTE CONF
So for example, if I have a literal what's a
literal?
NOTE CONF
It's a positive atom or an negated atom, and I
want to negate it.
NOTE CONF
How do I write the function?
So the negative of a positive atom is a negative
NOTE CONF
atom, and the negation of a negative atom is a
positive atom.
NOTE CONF
What's the sequent calculus equivalent of this function?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
No, not quite contrary.
Well, no double negation.
NOTE CONF
So remember, we assume that double negation behaves in the
way that we think it does logically.
NOTE CONF
And this is effectively implementing double negation.
Because if you negate a negative you get a positive.
NOTE CONF
Um here is just the definition of a little example
formula.
NOTE CONF
So this is.
If I write this formula out normally it's, uh.
NOTE CONF
Where am I?
So assuming I've written that correctly, then this formula e
NOTE CONF
g is the thing I've just written on the board.
Have I written it correctly?
NOTE CONF
Can you all see whether I've written it correctly or
not?
NOTE CONF
Yep.
So hopefully this explains slightly more clearly the relationship between
NOTE CONF
the data type and the actual formulae we're thinking of.
Of course, here I've written it out with an symbols
NOTE CONF
in between.
I can make it more Haskell ish by.
NOTE CONF
Making this a list.
I'm putting a big hand on the outside or something,
NOTE CONF
but who cares?
So that's a formula.
NOTE CONF
But in order to work out whether a formula is
true or not, I need to know something about the
NOTE CONF
universe that it's describing.
And when we've talked about universes, we've said that they
NOTE CONF
have an assignment of truth values to the propositional variables,
Or we know which sets of things a particular propositional
NOTE CONF
variable is true of.
So, for example, A might be true in the universe,
NOTE CONF
C might be false or whatever.
And that raises the question of if we're looking for
NOTE CONF
universes in which the formula is true.
How are we going to represent.
NOTE CONF
A valuation what's a valuation?
The valuation is the thing that tells you whether each
NOTE CONF
variable is true or false.
Now don't look at what I've done here.
NOTE CONF
If you don't look at that, what do you think
is the natural way to code in Haskell evaluation?
NOTE CONF
It might be a bit tricky because you might say,
is there a natural way here?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So that's.
NOTE CONF
Um.
What is evaluation?
NOTE CONF
It's something that takes an atom and tells you whether
it's true or false.
NOTE CONF
So the obvious thing for evaluation to be is a
function from atoms to booleans, because that's what it is.
NOTE CONF
But that's not a very nice data type to be
typing in and working with.
NOTE CONF
Because how do we define the function.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we're going to have to define the function in
terms of something more primitive.
NOTE CONF
You might write it out case by case.
So for example we could just say.
NOTE CONF
Is it lowercase true.
In Haskell?
NOTE CONF
I can never remember capital.
So we could write out a function like that.
NOTE CONF
That would be one way of doing it.
Um.
NOTE CONF
There's a reason for not doing that, which is that
functions are rather hard to break down into their component
NOTE CONF
parts, because we can't do pattern matching on a function,
we can't look at the code of a function.
NOTE CONF
A function gets compiled into code.
So it's not something that we can analyse except by
NOTE CONF
just trying it out on things.
So what we tend to do when we're trying to
NOTE CONF
represent evaluation is say, what we want is some nice,
simple data type that Contains the information that would be
NOTE CONF
in the function.
And there there are lots and lots of ways of
NOTE CONF
doing it.
So one way of doing it might be.
NOTE CONF
To have a list of pairs where each pair is
an atom and its value.
NOTE CONF
So that's a very simple.
Simple is good.
NOTE CONF
So never, never underestimate the benefits of a simple approach.
If I did that, what kind of problems might there
NOTE CONF
be?
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Could have multiple values.
So if I'm.
NOTE CONF
Either deliberately or unintentionally.
Do that.
NOTE CONF
What do I mean by it?
So if you do that, you have to have some
NOTE CONF
idea of how to deal with creating things with multiple
values.
NOTE CONF
There are many ways in which one would do that.
So actually what you would do is you wouldn't use
NOTE CONF
lists, you would use sets because that gets well.
No, even sets isn't enough.
NOTE CONF
You would use some kind of array structure keyed by
the atom name.
NOTE CONF
Or you could use lists like that.
But then you would have to write functions to manipulate
NOTE CONF
it and make sure that you never introduce multiple values.
So there's a lot of work that has to be
NOTE CONF
done there.
And so what I'm going to do here is use
NOTE CONF
something that is even simpler minded than that.
And has the benefit that it accidentally allows us to
NOTE CONF
think about valuations that we don't yet know about properly.
So I'm not going to give you valuations that have
NOTE CONF
the form.
Here's a value.
NOTE CONF
Here's an atom.
This is its value.
NOTE CONF
I'm just going to give you a list of which
literals are true.
NOTE CONF
So valuation over a particular type of atoms is the
val constructor.
NOTE CONF
And again this is a data type and structure.
It's meaningless.
NOTE CONF
And then it's just a list of literals nothing more.
What I mean by that.
NOTE CONF
Is that this list of literals is the ones that
I take to be true in the formula, as I'm
NOTE CONF
evaluating it.
Does that share some of the problems we just talked
NOTE CONF
about with lists?
Yes it does.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Because if it's a list of literals, there is nothing
NOTE CONF
stopping me writing.
Nothing stopping me writing.
NOTE CONF
The so-called valuation that.
Says that both A and not A are true literals.
NOTE CONF
Um, what am I going to do about that?
What I'm going to do about that is say we
NOTE CONF
will try very hard not to do that.
So.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
Why not?
NOTE CONF
Um, why not make it a list of atoms?
because we're going to be manipulating literals.
NOTE CONF
And at some points we might want to say we
don't know whether which way this literal is.
NOTE CONF
So it'll turn out that it's convenient for the algorithm
that works.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, making it a list of atoms is the obvious
thing, but actually it turns out that this way we
NOTE CONF
can, by the back door, represent literal atoms that we
know to be positive, atoms that we know to be
NOTE CONF
negative, and those that we don't yet know anything about.
So it's a bit sneaky.
NOTE CONF
Um, which from a Haskell point of view, I think
is very bad programming style.
NOTE CONF
There is a Haskell way of doing it more nicely,
but that would require more effort, and you're welcome to
NOTE CONF
think about that.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So if I've got a formula and evaluation, can I
write down a little Haskell function that tells me the
NOTE CONF
value of the formula.
True or false, given the valuation.
NOTE CONF
Well, of course I can.
And because Haskell is so wonderful, you can do it
NOTE CONF
all with a one line doubly nested list comprehension.
Which I have to stare at for a little while
NOTE CONF
before I understand it.
So you probably also have to stare at it a
NOTE CONF
little while, even after six weeks of this stuff.
Um, what's the function doing?
NOTE CONF
So this is the valuation.
And remember, this is just pattern matching against the tag
NOTE CONF
which says it's a valuation.
So this is a list of literals.
NOTE CONF
This is the formula.
And remember a formula is just an and tagged list
NOTE CONF
of clauses.
So CS here is a list of clauses.
NOTE CONF
And then I'm saying well I expect an end of
a set a list of clauses to evaluate to the
NOTE CONF
end of the ORS of all the things in it.
So what does this say?
NOTE CONF
This is doing the and over.
All the things that are in the list of clauses.
NOTE CONF
Now each clause is itself an all of stuff because
that's the way I defined it.
NOTE CONF
So I've got some implicit some pattern matching going on
in here.
NOTE CONF
So each all of see each all of the clause
is a member of the list of clauses.
NOTE CONF
And then given the list of literals here I'm saying
take each literal uh from the clause and determine whether
NOTE CONF
it's in the valuation list or not.
And then all all the result of that.
NOTE CONF
So given a complete valuation that tells you whether things
are true or false.
NOTE CONF
This arguably does it.
So if you want to try it out, I will.
NOTE CONF
Is the code already up on the open course page?
Yep.
NOTE CONF
So you can try this.
You can try this code and play with it.
NOTE CONF
If I try it if I look at the empty
valuation list.
NOTE CONF
So this is the formula which has no clauses.
And is.
NOTE CONF
So sorry this is an empty empty valuation.
So nothing is true.
NOTE CONF
Not even negative literals are true.
What is.
NOTE CONF
So any formula is going to turn out false.
Here is a valuation which says C is false, a
NOTE CONF
is true and D is false.
And if I apply that to the example formula E
NOTE CONF
e.g. which is shown down here.
Then you can see that it will indeed come out
NOTE CONF
true.
Um, and then as we said, the valuation is strange.
NOTE CONF
When I did this, this is an empty valuation.
So it's going to make everything false.
NOTE CONF
In particular, it's going to make a false and it's
going to make not a false, which is not very
NOTE CONF
meaningful.
Um, there are in fact some logics which are useful
NOTE CONF
in many circumstances.
Well, some circumstances in which this kind of thing is
NOTE CONF
actually allowed.
You can talk about a situation where A is not
NOTE CONF
true and not A is not true.
And you can even talk about situations where both A
NOTE CONF
and not a, a true, which is normally a contradiction.
And once you have a contradiction, then the whole mathematical
NOTE CONF
world collapses.
But actually it's useful in some circumstances to be able
NOTE CONF
to reason about contradictory things.
Because, amongst other things, people are very good at holding
NOTE CONF
contradictory beliefs.
So if you want to reason about the way people
NOTE CONF
think, it's useful to be able to handle contradiction.
Another application is database updates.
NOTE CONF
Um, but this is an aside.
What we're doing here is defining a kind of partial
NOTE CONF
valuation thing, tells us what we know to be false
and tells us what we know to be true.
NOTE CONF
And then given such a valuation, this very simple function
will tell you whether a formula is true or false
NOTE CONF
in it.
And if we don't know anything about a variable, it
NOTE CONF
defaults to being just false, both negated and positively.
Um, so you should have a look at the code
NOTE CONF
and play with it and check that it does what
I say it does.
NOTE CONF
Before we go on, any questions about this slide and
in particular this piece of code.
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
This is the one that we saw in the previous
NOTE CONF
slides.
Like the one you see like I said.
NOTE CONF
Um.
So this is, this is the same thing with just
NOTE CONF
different variable names because this is actually extracted from the
code instead of being written lazily by me on the
NOTE CONF
slide.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
So just l instead of literal.
I should fix that, shouldn't I?
NOTE CONF
Because it's unnecessarily confusing.
Um.
NOTE CONF
However, what I'm trying to do is not simply evaluate
a formula.
NOTE CONF
What I want to know is whether a formula can
be made to be true by setting variables to particular
NOTE CONF
values.
So how do we do that?
NOTE CONF
Is there a simple way to do it?
So if we have an arbitrary formula, it's got lots
NOTE CONF
of variables in it.
And we want to find out whether there's a way
NOTE CONF
to make the formula true.
Is there a simple way to do it?
NOTE CONF
I give you a formula.
It's got ten variables in it.
NOTE CONF
I say can you choose values of true and false
that make the formula true?
NOTE CONF
Yeah.
I heard that there is a kind of entity problem.
NOTE CONF
And that's true.
But we're not getting there yet because I asked if
NOTE CONF
there's a simple way to do it.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
It's true that what happens when you want to set.
Some of the variables might be negated.
NOTE CONF
Yeah, but I mean, this isn't simple.
We're trying to find out.
NOTE CONF
Is there a way.
Is there any.
NOTE CONF
When I say simple, I mean absolutely, totally, almost totally
braindead.
NOTE CONF
You don't need to think.
It's just the simplest thing you could possibly do.
NOTE CONF
Bearing in mind that computers are good at doing things
fast and they don't get bored.
NOTE CONF
So again, try every possible evaluation of the variables.
Okay, so that's easy to program.
NOTE CONF
It's by now you should be able to write a
Haskell function that generates all possible valuations.
NOTE CONF
Um, if I've got n propositional atoms in my formula,
how many possible valuations are there?
NOTE CONF
Two to the n, which is an unfortunately large number.
So it's easy in the sense that it's trivial to
NOTE CONF
write the code to list all possible valuations, but it
takes quite a long time.
NOTE CONF
And this is a bit sad because these problems get
quite large quite quickly.
NOTE CONF
For example, the timetabling problem for your exams.
How many students are there in the university by now?
NOTE CONF
20,015 thousand and 20,000.
There are.
NOTE CONF
At least a thousand different courses.
There are in a three week exam diet.
NOTE CONF
There are what, I don't know, 2050 different exam timetable
slots.
NOTE CONF
There are maybe a couple of hundred rooms in the
university.
NOTE CONF
That's an awful lot of variables.
And two to that is not something that we're going
NOTE CONF
to solve just by doing a brute force search.
Can we do better?
NOTE CONF
So who thinks we can definitely do better than that?
Okay, who thinks we definitely can't do better than that?
NOTE CONF
At least not all the time.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So the sad answer is, well, actually, the answer is
we don't know whether we can do better.
NOTE CONF
Um, but to the best of our belief, there is
no way of avoiding the exponential blow up all the
NOTE CONF
time.
Somebody can always come up with a really contorted example,
NOTE CONF
which is going to trigger the exponential blow up.
However, in practice we can do better a lot of
NOTE CONF
the time in the kind of examples that we actually
meet in practice.
NOTE CONF
So for example, your exams do actually get timetabled.
And so we are not hitting the exponential blow up
NOTE CONF
with your exam timetabling data.
Um, and.
NOTE CONF
Well, I have to be a bit careful here because
although often it works, it is actually also quite easy
NOTE CONF
to run into bad cases in some of the problems.
Why is this?
NOTE CONF
It's the one of the deepest results in deepest non
results in computer science because we simply don't know the
NOTE CONF
answer.
So if you've heard of p equals NP this is
NOTE CONF
the problem.
Can we find a satisfying assignment to a formula in
NOTE CONF
less than exponential time.
And strictly speaking, it's not quite that problem because NP
NOTE CONF
is not quite exponential time, but it's roughly that problem.
Um, and if you can find an algorithm works fast
NOTE CONF
always, then you will win what is now not an
enormous amount of money, but is still a handy amount
NOTE CONF
of money to have.
Just buy you a decent flat in Edinburgh.
NOTE CONF
And much more importantly, you will be assured of fame
for as long as civilisation survives.
NOTE CONF
Which is what, about 30 years at current rates of
progress, but a long time anyway.
NOTE CONF
So P equals NP if you haven't come across it
before we will say a little bit about it.
NOTE CONF
Maybe not in this course, but it will come up
again in second year, and then you can have the
NOTE CONF
opportunity to study it in detail in third year.
It's really deeply embarrassing because it's a very easy problem
NOTE CONF
to state, and we've been looking at it for almost
50 years and we don't know the answer.
NOTE CONF
We know an awful lot about why we don't know
the answer, but that stuff is outside my competence.
NOTE CONF
But if you do fourth year courses, you can find
us a bit about that.
NOTE CONF
So despite the fact that we can't do it tomorrow,
we will do it with something that works most of
NOTE CONF
the time pretty well.